1 President Reagan is leaving office proposing a truce in his battle with the United Nations and a boost in arms aid to friendly nations, but tossing the question of Nicaragua's Contra rebels to successor George Bush.
2 Reagan's foreign policy positions were reflected in the fiscal 1990 budget plan he sent to Congress on Monday.
3 Officials say his $13.2 billion foreign aid spending budget should remain relatively unchanged by the new Bush administration.
4 Consistent with past practice, there was no request for Contra assistance in Reagan's final budget.
5 The president routinely has treated that issue separately, and this time it will be Bush's decision.
6 Another difficult problem to be resolved by Bush is what to do about the bug-riddled new U.S. Embassy building in Moscow.
7 In his budget plan for next year, Reagan proposed to give the United Nations and other international organizations the full U.S. share of their budgets for the first time since 1986.
8 In addition, Reagan proposed to throw in $46 million as a downpayment on the $572 million in cumulative U.S. arrears to international organizations.
9 Reagan has held back part of the one-fourth U.S. share of U.N. financing since 1986 to protest what he charged was the world body's wasteful bureaucracy and anti-American tone.
10 The budget document pronounced that pressure successful and said the organization has reformed enough to warrant a reward.
11 Of the $14.8 billion in total foreign aid budget authority Reagan asked for next year, military assistance to U.S. allies comes to slightly more than $5 billion, about 7 percent over the current year.
12 As he has in the past, Reagan sought to convert loan programs for military sales into straight grants.
13 Direct economic aid to friendly nations would amount to $3.3 billion, a slight increase from the current figure.
14 As usual, Israel and Egypt were the two largest recipients of proposed aid.
15 Israel was earmarked for $1.8 billion in military aid and $1.2 billion in economic assistance, or $3 billion in total spending authority.
16 Egypt was proposed to receive $2.3 billion, including $1.3 billion for military purposes and $815 million in economic aid.
17 Deputy Secretary of State John Whitehead said Bush's nominee for secretary of state, James A. Baker III, had not been consulted about the budget made public Monday.
18 But Whitehead said that 'I have no reason to believe there will be any sharp differences' in the new administration over the Reagan budget proposals.
