1 Shining Path rebels killed 11 policemen in a cocaine-producing jungle valley, and Lima police arrested 200 students in a protest instigated by the Maoist guerrilla group, authorities said.
2 The two weekend ambushes by the Shining Path in the Huallaga Valley, where about 60 percent of the world's coca crop is grown, also wounded 11 people, the government paper La Cronica reported Tuesday.
3 The deaths brought the insurgency toll since Saturday to 28 killed.
4 In Lima, dozens of heavily armed riot police swept onto the San Marcos University campus on Tuesday, police said, arresting 200 students who were blocking nearby streets with rocks and bonfires and exploding dynamite charges.
5 Police reported no injuries in the protest, one of dozens at San Marcos over the past year.
6 Witnesses said the disturbance was sparked by recent austerity measures, but officials said Shining Path supporters were behind the campus violence.
7 The weekend deaths come amid a recent spurt of violence in the Shining Path insurgency, which has claimed 12,000 victims since fighting began in 1980.
8 La Cronica said separate guerrillas columns hiding in the dense jungle opened fire on passing patrol vehicles with automatic weapons and hand grenades.
9 Seven policemen were slain on a jungle road 20 miles northwest of Tingo Maria, 240 miles northeast of Lima, and four policemen died in an ambush near Polvora, 100 miles north of Tingo Maria, La Cronica said.
10 There were no reports of rebel casualties or word on whether police were able to return the gunfire.
11 Officials said the region has become a no-man's land overrun by drug traffickers and Maoist guerrillas who provide the traffickers protection in exchange for funds to buy weapons.
12 Peruvian coca is usually processed into a semi-refined state and smuggled into Colombia, where it is turned into pure cocaine for sale in U.S. and European markets, according to the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
13 The Huallaga Valley, Ayacucho and Apurimac are among eight states currently under states of emergency, giving the military broad policing and governing powers to counter the rebels.
