1 'Desire Under the Elms,' a new opera based on Eugene O'Neill's play of the same name, is blessed with a story perfect for opera -- full of rivalry, greed, sex and violence.
2 Soprano Judy Kaye, who won a Tony on Broadway last year, stars in the New York Opera Repertory Theater production, and is splendid in the pivotal role of Abbie.
3 But the music composed by Edward Thomas doesn't have all the power it needs.
4 The opera had its first staged presentation Wednesday at the City Center.
5 Operas these days are melodic, minimalist or have a jagged vocal line that doesn't sound like a melody to most listeners.
6 'Desire Under the Elms' is of the latter kind.
7 That's fine and this opera sounds good much of the time.
8 But in arias expressing emotion for instance, it often sounds bland.
9 A lullaby is a departure from the rest of the music.
10 But when a very dramatic moment comes, that music should also be a departure, hitting some heights.
11 In 'Desire Under the Elms,' the drama is principally carried by the situation and the words being sung.
12 Abbie marries elderly Ephraim Cabot (bass Nicholas Solomon), seduces his son Eben (tenor James Schwisow) and has a baby.
13 Abbie, Ephraim and Eben each want total ownership of the farm on which they live.
14 So the stew of sex, love and deception is further stirred by mistrust of love based on what any one might do to get the farm.
15 The orchestral scoring isn't heavy so most of the words could be understood.
16 The men's voices were good but not big, an appraisal which extends to Robert Paul Heimann and William Livingston, as two older sons who leave home before Abbie arrives.
17 Miss Kaye's voice most nearly filled the house.
18 The New York Opera Repertory Theater was founded in 1977 by Leigh Gibbs Gore, who conducted the opera.
19 It is dedicated to creation and performance of opera and new music theater.
20 Composer Thomas is a native of Chisholm, Minn. Joe Masteroff, who wrote the book for Broadway's 'She Loves Me' and 'Cabaret,' is making his debut as a librettist.
21 'Desire Under the Elms' was done in a workshop at the O'Neill Theater Center's National Music Theater Conference, in its first year, 1978.
22 It also has had concert performances.
23 The set for this first staged presentation was a cutaway two-story house by Michael Anania.
24 Gregg Barnes designed costumes and David Gately directed.
25 It will be performed again on Friday and Sunday.
