1 England fast bowler Devon Malcolm is on a final warning for his behavior from International Cricket Council (ICC) match referee John Reid going into the fifth Ashes Test against Australia, which starts at the WACA Ground on Friday.
2 Malcolm bowled England to victory in the fourth Test in Adelaide on Monday with a devastating burst of 3-4 in 11 deliveries at the start of the second innings, dismissing Mark Taylor, Michael Slater and Steve Waugh to set up the tourists' 106-run win.
3 The Derby paceman was lightning fast at times, but captain Mike Atherton revealed today that Malcolm was one of several bowlers who had been warned by the ICC referee for 'overt aggression'.
4 Chris Lewis was fined 30 percent of his match fee at the end of the Adelaide Test for pointing Craig McDermott towards the dressing rooms and Atherton said Reid had told him after the Sydney Test to pass on a warning to Malcolm.
5 Atherton said he would remind Malcolm of the penalties of the ICC code of conduct, but admitted he did not want his strike bowler to tone down his pace or aggression in the process.
6 'John Reid spoke to me after Devon Malcolm waved Mark Waugh to the pavilion in Sydney and said it wasn't on,' Atherton said.
7 'Before the Adelaide game, he told me to mention it (to the players) and I did.
8 'I mentioned it to the lads who are on the last warning.'
9 Atherton said he had no problem with the fine Lewis received after Adelaide and said the Englishmen realized immediately he would face stern action from Reid.
10 Reid has wide-ranging powers and can fine a player up to 75 percent of his match fee or even hand out a three-match suspension in extreme cases.
11 England can square the series with a victory in Perth -- a feat that seemed impossible after heavy defeats in Brisbane and Melbourne.
12 'It's been such a black and white tour,' Atherton said.
13 'In the first two Tests, we were way behind Australia. In Sydney and Adelaide, we were the better side but not by the same amount that they were better than us (earlier).'
14 Replacement batsman Mark Ramprakash is likely to play in Perth, leaving the England selectors to decide whether to use four seamers or include spinner Phil Tufnell.
15 Australia seems likely to play left-armer Brendon Julian, relegating Jo Angel to 12th man.
