1 The European Union said Wednesday talks for broad economic and political accords with Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia may be concluded as early as April 1.
2 'We are working as hard as we can' to conclude so-called Europe Agreements with the Baltic states, said EU Commission spokesman Nico Wegter.
3 'Maybe within two months this couild be concluded.'
4 The agreements are the basis of a plan to let East European nations into the EU at an as yet unspecified date.
5 On Wednesday such accords between the EU and four eastern neighbors took effect, bringing Bulgaria, Romania and the Czech and Slovak republics a step closer to European Union membership.
6 They provide for a political dialogue and cooperation in education, culture and finance between the EU and its eastern neighbors along with free trade in industrial goods, beneficial terms for farm produce and freeing up services and financial transfers.
7 Poland and Hungary led the way with accords that took effect exactly one year ago.
8 The EU states have launched a 'pre-accession strategy' to bring eastern economies up to speed and prepare them for EU membership.
9 The East Europeans must continue apace with market reforms and gradually adopt EU single market laws.
10 For its part, the EU will continue to open markets to the East and consult their neighbors before imposing punitive trade measures.
11 The EU rose to 15 members on January 1 when Austria, Sweden and Finland joined. It will take no more newcomers until after an overhaul of its institutions and decision-making rules scheduled for 1996.
12 The East European accord lead to an unprecedented rapprochement between the countries of East and West Europe. They provide for:
13 - joint ministerial meetings every six months;
14 - regular consultations among government officials and experts;
15 - increased cooperation in justice and interior affairs; and
16 - a summit of EU and East European leaders to assess their progress towards meeting conditions for joining the trade bloc.
17 The accords, with unlimited duration, announce a transition period of 10 years, and will be reviewed in 1999 for all aspects except trade.
18 Beneficiaries must fulfill and maintain EU-prescribed conditions of human rights, democracy and market economies.
