1 In a showdown over the independence of Albania's judiciary, parliament has defied the ruling Democratic Party and voted against lifting the immunity of the head of the country's supreme court.
2 The vote late Wednesday went against a recommendation of the general prosecutor to lift the immunity of judge Zef Brozi, 35, so he could be investigated for the controversial release of an alleged drug smuggler from Greece.
3 Opposition lawmakers had claimed the Democrats wanted to oust the independent-minded Brozi before highly charged cases come before the supreme court.
4 Brozi's court is due next week to consider the appeal of four ethnic Greeks sentenced last September to stiff jail terms for espionage. Their jailing severely damaged relations with neighboring Greece, which stopped European Union aid to Albania as a result.
5 In a secret vote, 53 deputies voted against lifting Brozi's immunity, 49 voted in favor and five abstained. Thirty-three deputies were absent.
6 Earlier Wednesday, Brozi initially was barred from the parliament chamber. Deputies, including Democratic Party members, protested, and Brozi later addressed parliament, telling deputies: 'The request for lifting my immunity is another shot against the independence of the judiciary.'
7 Arben Imami, a deputy who broke with the Democratic Party and joined the opposition Democratic Alliance, was ordered to leave parliament after decrying 'fascist methods' against Brozi.
8 Imami said lifting Brozi's immunity could open up a series of similar moves. The opposition Socialists, or former Communists, would also be able to use such methods if they regained power.
9 Opposition allegations that the Democratic Party is tampering with justice have increased since word last month that two former colleagues of President Sali Berisha may face corruption charges.
10 Parliament was discussing Thursday whether to lift the immunity of the two men: former Finance Minister Genc Ruli and Rexhep Uka, a former deputy prime minister.
11 Last December, a parliamentary committee already had rejected the general prosecutor's request to lift Brozi's immunity.
12 In November, Brozi was the only prominent Democratic Party man to criticize Berisha over a November referendum that failed to win popular approval for a new constitution.
