1 The Islamic suicide bombers who killed 21 Israelis last week dressed like soldiers to avoid detection, police said Thursday.
2 The daily Yedioth Ahronoth said the men, identified as Salah Shakr and Anwar Sukar from PLO-ruled Gaza, were aided by former Palestinian collaborators with Israel living in an Israeli-guarded enclave in the strip.
3 Yedioth said the collaborators gave the militants army uniforms that helped them leave Gaza and reach a junction in central Israel on Jan. 22 without detection.
4 Both Palestinians, 20 soldiers and a civilian died in the two blasts they detonated there.
5 Police spokesman Eric Bar-Chen confirmed the attackers were wearing either uniforms or similar clothing.
6 Israeli police, fearing an escalation of attacks to mark the holy Muslim month of Ramadan, have reinforced troops in Jerusalem.
7 There is also concern that female Palestinian Hamas activists will join the suicide attack squads, Yedioth reported. A number of Islamic women met with Hamas leaders recently asking to be allowed to participate in attacks, it said.
8 The bombing on Jan. 22 dealt a blow to Israel-PLO peace talks and sparked an intensified crackdown on Islamic militants.
9 Israeli security forces detained seven members of the Islamic Jihad and Hamas groups in the West Bank Thursday and jailed ten other Islamic militants without trial, Israel radio reported. A Hamas activist in Gaza, Ibrahim Yazouri, said Palestinian police there rounded up three Hamas activists in the past four days.
10 An Israeli official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that in a raid last week on an east Jerusalem college, troops uncovered a Hamas ring planning to kidnap an Israeli soldier.
11 Israeli troops arrested 30 Palestinians in the raid. Four of the students in the ring were from Gaza, the official said.
12 He added that troops confiscated skullcaps of religious Jews and knives from the Palestinians' rooms.
13 A photograph published in Yedioth showed a Palestinian wearing a skullcap and the clothing of religious Jews and practicing Hebrew prayer in front of a wall painted with an Arabic inscription.
14 Islamic militant violence against Israelis has stymied talks aimed at extending the PLO-ruled Gaza-Jericho autonomy throughout the West Bank.
15 Israel demands that Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority take stronger measures against the Muslim extremists.
16 Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was to meet with Arafat and other Arab leaders in Cairo Thursday in an attempt to breathe life into the peace process.
17 The leaders were expected to make a joint statement denouncing terrorism, Israeli newspapers said.
