1 A Turkish court on Thursday ordered Thursday the seizure of a book by a Turk who has written on the war against the Kurds, and another court ordered the confiscation of copies of a pro-Kurdish daily.
2 The author, Yasar Kemal, recently wrote in the German newsmagazine Der Spiegel that Kurdish villages were burned in an attempt to battle the 11-year separatist rebellion in southeast Turkey.
3 Western governments and rights groups have made similar charges. The government denies any military action to destroy Kurdish villages.
4 The State Security Court said it was ordering the seizure of Kemal's book, 'The Freedom of Thought and Turkey,' because it provokes 'hatred and enmity on the basis of differences in people's races and locations where they live.'
5 Kemal and his publisher, Erdal Oz, were ordered to appear in court next week for questioning.
6 The author is awaiting arraignment on charges of making separatist Kurdish propaganda in his Der Spiegel article.
7 A prosecutor said he would face trial under an anti-terrorism law. Conviction could bring a prison sentence of two to five years.
8 In separate court developments in Istanbul, seizure was ordered for Ozgur Ulke (Free Country) daily. The court contended the paper was virtually the same publication as one banned last year on charges of making separatist propaganda. That paper was called Ozgur Gundem.
9 Baki Karadeniz, the Ozgur Ulke editor, said the paper would continue to publish even though the copies would be seized before reaching newsstands. The paper is appealing the ruling.
10 Nineteen employees of Ozgur Gundem have been killed in unsolved murders in the last three years. Thirty-five employees from the two papers are currently in jail on charges of making separatist Kurdish propaganda.
11 Kurdish guerrillas of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) have been waging war against the state since 1984 and more than 14,000 people have been killed in 11 years of bloody separatist fighting.
12 (AB-KO-KL)
