1 A victim of the mass shooting on a commuter train testified Friday that he froze as the gunman walked toward him, stared straight into his eyes, and shot him.
2 Victim Robert Giugliano said he watched as a woman 'with an angelic face' was shot in the head, spraying blood around the train car.
3 Giugliano was the first person on the stand to visibly unnerve defendant Colin Ferguson, who is serving as his own lawyer.
4 While being cross-examined by Ferguson, Giugliano locked his eyes on the defendant.
5 Ferguson, a Jamaican immigrant, started stumbling over his words and began a half-dozen questions without completing them, then asked the judge for a recess and took a 15-minute break.
6 Six people were killed and 19 wounded in the Dec. 7, 1993, rampage on a crowded Long Island Rail Road commuter train. Ferguson says the shootings were committed by someone else who grabbed his gun from his bag as he slept.
7 Giugliano had recounted in detail how he saw the gunman walking toward him through the car, sweeping his gun from right to left as he picked off victims.
8 'People around me were ducking into seats but I couldn't move,' the 39-year-old witness testified. 'I was standing there with my briefcase in my hand. I couldn't move. Shots were getting closer.'
9 Then he saw a woman who'd been sitting next to him start crawling on the floor, toward him and the gunman.
10 'I was looking down, saying `No,'' Giugliano said. 'I was yelling, `No!' At the next instant the back of her head . exploded on the floor in front of me. Blood all over.
11 'I looked her in the eyes. I didn't know who she was. But I remember this face to this day, because when I went home, I remember telling my wife, `There was this beautiful girl with an angelic face come on the train, and two minutes later she was dead at my feet.'
12 Then, he said, the gunman 'looked me in the eyes, square in the face and he pointed his gun at me. I remember hearing one shot maybe going over my head and the next one, I was hit.'
13 During cross-examination, when Ferguson asked Giugliano what he did after seeing the woman get shot, Giugliano said in a disgusted tone: 'I looked down in disbelief, turned to my left and looked you right in the face.'
14 After Ferguson returned from his break to question Giugliano, he barely paused to hear the answers and, as with much of his cross-examination, the interrogation appeared to have little purpose.
15 'Did you see when the blood splashed on your feet?' Ferguson asked. 'Were you shot at the time you were hit?'
16 Also on Friday, Judge Donald Belfi denied Ferguson's request to subpoena President Clinton and former New York State Gov. Mario Cuomo, saying Ferguson had failed to prove why their testimony was relevant.
17 Outside court, Giugliano was asked about Ferguson's nervousness.
18 'Today was under my terms,' Giugliano said. 'I was in control. I wanted the chance to look him in the eye. Maybe the guy was frightened. Maybe he was unnerved.'
19 Also testifying Friday was Lisa Combatti, who said she saw the gunman coming and crouched down to protect her belly because she was pregnant. She said she felt numbness as a bullet hit her.
20 'I looked up and said, `I've been hit! I'm pregnant!'' she recalled. 'Two women grabbed me, pulled me through the end of the third car into the second car.'
21 The bullet damaged Combatti's sciatic nerve. Her baby, Kimberly, was born healthy, and celebrated her first birthday Friday.
