1 Australian bowlers Glenn McGrath and Mark Waugh took two wickets apiece to have England struggling at 110 for four at stumps Saturday, second day of the fifth and final Ashes cricket Test at the WACA Ground.
2 England's hopes of scoring 203 runs to avoid the follow-on rest largely on the shoulders of the fifth wicket pair. In-form batsman Graham Thorpe is unbeaten on 54 with Mark Ramprakash on 14.
3 Australia earlier scored 402 runs in its first innings.
4 England looked like recovering from a second-over batting disaster when medium-pacer Mark Waugh took two wickets in the space of four deliveries as the innings sunk to 77 for four.
5 Waugh, who conceded 11 runs in his first over, struck with the first delivery of his second -- trapping Graham Gooch (37) leg before wicket. Three balls later he had John Crawley brilliantly caught by Shane Warne at second slip for a duck.
6 McGrath made up for the absence of the experienced Craig McDermott -- who was sidelined by a back injury -- forcing England on the back foot in his first over, taking two wickets off successive deliveries.
7 Skipper Michael Atherton suffered a rare failure, dismissed for the first time in the series without getting into double figures.
8 After Atherton gloved a catch down leg side to wicketkeeper Ian Healy, Mike Gatting fell for his second nought in successive innings when McGrath forced him to play-on off the very next delivery.
9 McDermott suffered a sprained back during a net session and was taken to a local hospital for treatment.
10 Having hobbled around for 25 minutes in a desperate effort to see Steve Waugh through to a century, McDermott aggravated the injury, forcing him out of Australia's new ball attack.
11 Steve Waugh batted for 288 minutes before being stranded on an unbeaten 99 as Australia posted its sizeable first innings total.
12 Waugh became only the second batsman in Ashes history to remain not out on 99 when No. 11 McDermott was run out.
13 Steve's twin brother Mark, running for McDermott, backed up too far and a TV replay decided the non-striker's fate.
14 Former England opener Geoff Boycott was the only other batsman left unbeaten on 99 -- in an Ashes Test here in 1978-79.
15 England's frustration continued for the second day as the tourists dropped two more catches to add to a first day tally of four.
16 Australia resumed on 283 for four and Greg Blewett departed in the fourth over of the day for 20 when he edged a catch to wicketkeeper Steve Rhodes off the bowling of Angus Fraser.
17 Healy, discomforted by a calf muscle injury, batted with a runner and helped Waugh add 37 runs for the sixth wicket.
18 Phil DeFreitas then struck in successive overs, forcing Healy to hit a catch to Chris Lewis at gully and then finding the edge of Warne's bat as Australia was reduced to 328 for seven.
19 Jo Angel (11) dropped anchor for 65 minutes and shared in a 58-run stand with Waugh for the eighth wicket. Angel was dropped twice on five by Rhodes and Atherton soon after lunch.
20 Waugh, who resumed on 23, played and missed for major part of the morning session but batted bravely to hit 12 boundaries off 183 balls, the sixth time he has reached the 90s in 72 Tests.
