1 Amid flu epidemics and rude, underpaid Russian medics in a bleak Moscow winter, the American Medical Center stands like an oasis with its spotless floors, smiling nurses and Western-quality health care.
2 The idea behind the AMC was simple: to provide exactly such medical help and service to an ever-expanding community of foreign diplomats, businessmen, journalists, students and tourists in what was then the Soviet capital.
3 'The whole concept grew out of the fact that there wasn't any Western health care for foreigners. That's how we first started,' says Dr. Myles Druckman, the AMC's chief medical officer.
4 And it worked. Created in August 1991, just before the hard-line Soviet coup, the U.S.-run outpatient clinic now boosts of having treated more than 25,000 patients.
5 The staff has grown to nearly 70 people, including seven physicians and nine nurses, laboratory assistants and pharmacists. Another clinic opened in 1992 in St. Petersburg.
6 The Moscow one has moved from a convenient but small location not far from the U.S. Embassy into larger premises off central Tverskaya Street, Moscow's Fifth Avenue.
7 But the years that have passed since the Soviet breakup also broke the AMC's monopoly. There are now several other foreign-run or joint clinics in Moscow, some much less expensive than the pricey AMC, not to mention private Russian clinics that also could pose competition.
8 'In the last year, about six or seven Western-style clinics have opened up in Moscow. They are all seeing that there's a great need in the community for high-quality care,' notes Druckman.
9 But the medic says competition will only benefit the AMC.
10 'Competition is healthy, because it will make people work better, work harder, and shall hopefully bring down some of the business costs,' he said.
11 Druckman says the AMC is continuing to grow, albeit at a slower rate than in its first years, and is currently treating 50 to 60 patients a day. Now, there are plans to offer dental care at the new two-story Moscow premises.
12 The AMC offers a variety of other services -- including pediatrics, vaccinations, prenatal care, gynecology and acute care.
13 It is associated with Russian hospitals in Moscow that can treat patients in need of hospitalization, and as a backup for medical consultations, has a telephone hookup with the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
14 Membership programs include individual, family and corporate membership, and those enlisting enjoy a 30 percent to 40 percent discount on AMC services and a 24-hour access to medical help, said Chris Edstein, the clinic's marketing director.
15 These services, though, don't come cheap.
16 The least expensive student membership program costs $40 a month, and a doctor's exam would cost a non-member a hearty $150, compared with the average Russian monthly pay of $100.
17 Many still prefer the AMC to other clinics, especially the Russian ones.
18 'We've been here for many years now and developed quite a good reputation for patient care,' Druckman said. 'So I think there's a lot of trust in the community.'
19 Such advantages as Western-trained physicians and the AMC's emphasis on a 'service-oriented system' also are beneficial, he said.
20 The bright posters, a TV set in the waiting room, toys for children and attentive staff are all part of that; plainly speaking, the secret is being nice to people.
21 'It's a very important piece,' smiled Druckman. 'People want to feel comfortable, they want to feel happy, they want to feel satisfied when they leave. Part of that feeling is that they received good treatment and good advice and were treated nicely and humanely.'
22 The AMC recently has discovered a whole new market -- Russia's new rich, the so-called 'new Russians,' along with the Russian employees of foreign companies, for whom it wants to develop a special insurance plan.
23 'Up until about 18 months ago, there were almost exclusively foreign patients,' Druckman said. 'Our focus now has been to try to increase the Russian portion of our patients.'
24 'Right now, we are seeing about 30 percent Russian patients and that's growing very rapidly. We feel that's very, very important for us. Our goal is to provide Western-quality care for everyone, not just foreigners.'
