1 New fighting was reported between Peruvian and Ecuadorean troops along their long-disputed jungle border Sunday as cease-fire talks broke up without a truce.
2 Ecuador charged for a second day that Peruvian fighters attacked its posts at the headwaters of the Cenepa River, where the two countries have been fighting on and off for 10 days.
3 Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, who visited the border region Sunday, said Peruvian troops had surrounded the base of Tihuinza and were advancing on the post.
4 But Ecuadorean officials said they had repelled an attack on the same base, which both countries say is in their territory. They also claimed Peru was using artillery helicopters to attack other posts.
5 Ecuadorean President Sixto Duran-Ballen left to visit Chile, Argentina and Brazil as part of an international diplomacy campaign to get his view across to foreign leaders.
6 In Rio de Janeiro, talks to end the hostilities between the two Andean nations broke off when mediators said the negotiations were taking too long. They said Ecuador had asked for more time to study the latest proposals.
7 Sources in Rio de Janeiro said Peru and the negotiators had agreed upon a demilitarized zone eight kilometers (4.8 miles) wide, while Ecuador insisted on only a kilometer-wide zone. Ecuador also wants to keep its military posts in place along the conflict zone that both side claim is national territory.
8 'I prefer not to think of the talks as a failure but rather as a preparation for more complete understanding and what we all hope will be a cease-fire and a permanent peace,' said Sebastiao de Rego Barros, Brazil's acting foreign minister and chairman of the talks.
9 He said efforts to reach a truce would continue from various nations' capitals.
10 Peru has accused Ecuador of dragging its feet on an accord and said Ecuador was trying to gain international sympathy by presenting itself as the victim. Ecuador said Peru was misrepresenting its position and denied that it was intransigent.
11 At the same time that talks ended without a truce, Ecuador claimed Peruvian jungle troops attacked four more of its posts in the disputed stretch of dense jungle. Ecuador said its positions were also attacked Saturday.
12 The fighting is taking place around rugged, jungle-covered mountains called the Cordillera del Condor along the border 850 kilometers (530 miles) north of Lima, and 350 kilometers (220 miles) southeast of the Ecuadorean capital of Quito.
13 Ecuadorean officials accused Peru on Sunday of using guerrilla warfare in its efforts to dislodge Ecuadorean forces.
14 Peru sent soldiers experienced in fighting Maoist guerrillas to the disputed region last week. Reporters who have visited the area say the Ecuadorean troops are dug into the mountaintops and have honeycombed the terrain with tunnels.
15 No new casualty figures were given. Peruvian officials had no comment on reports of new fighting. But Lima newspapers Sunday reported that combat was continuing.
16 Peru and Ecuador had announced Friday that they had reached agreement in principle to end the border conflict and set up a demilitarized zone. The agreement was contingent on the presidents of both nations giving final approval to the details of the truce.
17 At least 20 people have been killed in fighting that erupted Jan. 26 over the unmarked 80-kilometer (50-mile) portion of the border. The conflict over the area, which may contain gold, uranium and oil, stems from a 1941 war that Ecuador lost.
18 Peru contends the entire 1,600-kilometer (1,000-mile) border was established in a 1942 agreement. Ecuador declared the agreement null in 1960, before the border was fully marked.
19 Each side claims the other started the latest fighting.
20 Ecuador says eight of its soldiers have died in the conflict and two are missing and believed dead. Peru acknowledges it has lost 11 soldiers. One Peruvian civilian was killed after stepping on a land mine. Both sides have mined the border area.
