1 Ferrari unveiled a new Formula-1 car Monday hoping to end the 11-year title drought of the idolized Italian team in the World F-1 Championship.
2 Looking for all the good fortune possible, Italy's currently unbeatable ski hero Alberto Tomba gave his blessing.
3 Tomba touched the red-painted 412-T2 model and said: 'I hope to bring it good luck and inspire a successful season.'
4 The new Ferrari, powered by a 3,000-cc, 12-cyclinder engine, was shown to reporters at the team headquarters near Modena.
5 'He has the winning touch, it's a good omen,' said Ferrari Chairman Luca Codrero di Montezemolo, as the three-time Olympic champion drew loud cheers from a crowd of Ferrari fans, who were more enthusiastic about Tomba than Ferrari drivers Jean Alesi and Gerhard Berger.
6 The 1995 model is the 41st built by Ferrari for its 46th World F-1 Championship.
7 Montezemolo said the Italian team worked hard to adapt the car to new regulations and improve substantially from 1994.
8 Last year, Ferrari scored a single Grand Prix victory, with Gerhard Berger at Hockenheim in Germany.
9 'We have high hopes to do definitely better than in 1994, a tragic year for F-1. Credibility of this sport was at risk, and we lost one of the best drivers ever. He was a loyal person, who will be greatly missed,' Montezemolo said.
10 Brazilian Ayrton Senna, a three-time world champion, was killed in a high speed crash during the San Marino Grand Prix at Imola in May.
11 Montezemolo stressed that he expected a tough competition by engine-makers such as Mercedes, Renault and Peugeot which power McLaren, Williams, Benetton and Jordan teams.
12 'But I also expect a more loyal attitude, and respect of the rules, by all parties involved in F-1,' Montezemolo said.
13 German driver Michael Schumacher won the 1994 world drivers championship following a controversial last-race collision with runner-up Damon Hill which knocked the British driver out of title contention.
14 Schumacher and his Benetton team also faced allegations that their car did not conform to FIA rules in some Grand Prix races.
15 Ferrari's British designer John Barnard, who was blamed by some critics for the poor start of the Italian cars in the 1994 Championship, said new regulations 'opened new avenues (in the design of the new chassis), forced substantial changes from 1994 and made our car more driveable.'
16 Team manager Jean Todt said the first qualifying session of the Championship opener, in Brazil on March 26, will prove if Ferrari cars are competitive.
17 'Until then we can just hope to have filled the gap,' Todt said.
18 Montezemolo said Ferrari was developing a new 10-cylinder engine which would be ready by April.
19 'It would be used in the 1995 championship only in case it proves definitely better than the 12-cylinder.'
20 Then he added: 'I expect wins this season. Otherwise we could close the shop and go home.'
21 The Italian F-1 team, which is part of the luxury car maker founded by Enzo Ferrari, is controlled by Italy's auto giant Fiat of Turin.
