1 Shuttle commander James Wetherbee fired Discovery's thrusters today to begin a final approach toward space station Mir -- the first convergence of American and Russian spaceships in 20 years.
2 The 19-second jet firing came as the two 100-ton spaceships orbited nine miles apart at 17,500 mph, some 245 miles over South America.
3 The maneuver was to send the shuttle a half-mile beneath Mir, when Wetherbee would take manual control, pulling up in front and firing braking jets to slowly close to 400 feet.
4 The final rendezvous phase, a 35-foot close encounter that Russian space officials agreed to virtually at the last minute, had Discovery flying to within 35 feet.
5 Engineers from NASA and the Russian Space Agency huddled throughout the night and into the morning to discuss a steering thruster leak near the shuttle's tail that has been spewing fuel since shortly after Friday's launch.
6 The Russian agency insisted that unless the jet stopped leaking, Discovery would have to stay at least 400 feet from Mir instead of closing to within 35 feet.
7 They feared that small chunks of frozen fuel might damage optical sensors on a Soyuz capsule attached to the orbiting outpost. Mir's three cosmonauts need the capsule to return to Earth next month. There was also concern that Mir's solar panels might be contaminated.
8 NASA engineers didn't think the leakage would really damage the station, but said they didn't blame the Russians for being cautious.
9 When Discovery and Mir were less than 50 miles apart, Mission Control passed on the good news to Wetherbee that he could proceed.
10 'To everybody who worked the issue, thank you very much,' said Weatherbee, who was eager to test the shuttle's handling near the massive station.
11 The close-approach maneuver was planned as practice for the first shuttle-station docking this June.
12 The Russians agreed to it on three conditions. Discovery's leaking jet and two others connected to it would be shut down during the final stage of the rendezvous, thereby eliminating the leak. Secondly, the shuttle would back away from Mir immediately if any one of six critical steering jets failed. The shuttle also was not to come closer than 35 feet, as previously agreed.
13 When the decision finally was reached, cosmonaut Vladimir Titov, the second Russian to fly aboard a shuttle, could already see Mir and was talking with its crew: Alexander Viktorenko, Yelena Kondakova and Valery Polyakov.
14 The two spacecraft were 104 miles apart when ship-to-ship communications began. NASA hadn't expected the contact until the distance closed to 10 miles.
15 Gregarious conversation between Titov and his fellow cosmonauts filled Mission Control. The Mir crew members reported that Discovery looked to them like 'a large star on the horizon.'
16 The only previous rendezvous between U.S. and Russian spaceships was the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz docking.
17 The current eight-day flight is a prelude to seven Atlantis-Mir dockings planned through 1997, the first this June. NASA insisted the first docking would proceed with or without the 35-foot approach by Discovery.
