1 The East Coast had its coldest weather of the season on Monday with freezing temperatures as far south as northern Florida as arctic air spilled in behind a blustery weekend snowstorm.
2 Crestview, Florida, in the state's northern Panhandle, dipped to 25 degrees Fahrenheit (-4 Celsius) overnight. It reached 14 degrees below zero F (-25.5 C) at Snowshoe, West Virginia, and was even colder in parts of upstate New York and New England.
3 The cold came on the heels of a storm that brought snow and ice across the mid-Atlantic states and New England on Saturday, with up to 3 feet (90 cms) in parts of Vermont.
4 Wind blowing at 20 mph (32 kmph) to 40 mph (64 kmph) caused 'whiteouts' on some upstate New York highways Sunday. While the wind eased Monday, the cold didn't.
5 The National Weather Service in Burlington, Vermont, issued an advisory warning of dangerously cold wind chills that could dip as low as 60 below zero F. A handful of Vermont schools were closed because of the weather.
6 Scattered school closings were reported from West Virginia and Maryland to Vermont and upstate New York.
7 In Florida, Jacksonville's City Rescue Mission was filled to capacity as overnight temperatures fell to freezing levels. Virginia Crawford, a mission spokeswoman, said 183 people crowded into the mission that holds 170 beds.
8 In South Carolina, the cold was blamed for the death Saturday of a 55-year-old man who already had lost both legs to exposure several years earlier.
9 The snow and wind collapsed a nearly 100-year-old aviary at New York City's Bronx Zoo on Saturday, allowing at least 33 rare gulls and terns to fly away. The loose birds are used to the cold, but officials said they have never had to find their own food and their chances of surviving are slim.
10 One of the birds was found this morning on the zoo grounds, 'sort of strolling along one of the walkways, looking a little confused,' said zoo spokesman Patrick Milliman.
11 In winter resort areas like Davis, West Virginia, which averages 150 inches (381 cms) of snow a year, residents rejoiced over winter's late-arriving bounty. Up to 10 inches (25 cms) fell in region.
12 'Everybody's happy,' said Gary Berti, who owns a sports shop in Davis. 'You can just tell the whole mood has changed. When the skiers come up here, it makes the business world go around.'
