1 Qualifier Carsten Arriens of Germany beat British veteran Jeremy Bates 6-3, 6-4 Tuesday to advance to the second round of the dlrs 1 million Dubai Open tennis championship.
2 Arriens received a spot in the main 32-man draw after Australia's Mark Woodforde pulled out of the tournament on Monday.
3 Woodforde had not recovered from the Davis Cup match in Durban, South Africa, where he was forced to withdraw Monday due to exhaustion during the decisive singles match against Marcos Ondruska.
4 In another first-round match, sixth-seeded Petr Korda of the Czech Republic easily defeated German Oliver Gross 6-1, 6-2.
5 Korda, who did not play for his country in the Davis Cup this year, arrived in Dubai a week ago and played a lot of golf, which he said relaxes him, before the tournament opened.
6 After dropping the second game of the first set, Korda, ranked No. 20 in the world, won seven straight games.
7 Gross closed to within 2-1 in the second set, but Korda broke his opponent in the fourth and eighth games to capture the match.
8 'I feel things are falling into place now,' Korda said. 'I had a pretty bad time last year and I think I'm doing pretty well and hope to get into the swing in the latter part of the season.'
9 Francisco Clavet of Spain advanced after Germany's Karsten Braasch retired in the third set due to acute dehydration.
10 The German was leading 5-3 in the second set and held match point at 5-4. He hit what he thought was an ace in the 10th game, but that was overruled. He eventually lost the game and the set.
11 'I had plenty of cold water which I thought would reduce the pain in my stomach,' said Braasch. 'But it didn't help at all.'
12 Clavet won 6-7 (6-8), 7-5, retired.
13 Alberto Costa of Spain later beat Vince Spadea of the United States 6-2, 6-3.
14 Arriens, ranked only 222nd in the world, surrendered just three points on his serve in the first set against Bates.
15 Bates, 31, was going on sedately with his baseline topspins in the first set until he failed to hold serve in the sixth game. That put the 26-year-old Arriens ahead at 4-2.
16 Arriens held serve in the next game and although Bates pulled out the eighth game, Arriens wrapped up the set.
17 In the second set, Arriens broke the Briton in the third and seventh games to take a 5-2 lead.
18 The Briton, who reached the fourth round at Wimbledon last year, fought back and broke the German's serve in the eighth game. But Arriens held on to win the set 6-4.
