1 Prosecutors in the O.J. Simpson case laid out a timeline for murder, centered around a dog's 'plaintive wail' in the night.
2 Pablo Fenjves, whose home is across an alley from Nicole Brown Simpson's, testified on Tuesday that about 15 to 20 minutes into the 10 o'clock news on June 12, he heard 'a very distinctive barking' coming from the area of her home.
3 'It was at a significant pitch, and as you may recall I described it at the time as a plaintive wail,' said Fenjves, who like most of the day's witnesses had testified last summer at Simpson's preliminary hearing. 'It sounded like a very unhappy animal.'
4 Prosecutors claim that Ms. Simpson and her friend Ronald Goldman were slashed to death about 10:15 p.m. outside her condo and that the barking came from Ms. Simpson's Akita, which left bloody pawprints around the murder scene.
5 The timing is important: The defense has said Simpson was home at the time, practicing his golf swing in the yard before leaving for the airport for a business trip to Chicago.
6 Simpson, 47, is the most prominent American accused of murder in recent years. His trial has riveted the American public, who recall his college and professional football exploits and work as an actor and television sports commentator. Simpson has pleaded innocent.
7 With large, color photos of the victims' faces displayed on a courtroom easel, jurors also heard testimony from employees at Mezzaluna, where Goldman worked as a waiter and where Ms. Simpson ate her last meal hours before they were killed.
8 Karen Lee Crawford, who was working as a manager that Sunday night, described a lost pair of glasses that led Goldman to his death, and began to cry when Prosecutor Marcia Clark showed black slacks and a white dress shirt.
9 'It's Ron's shirt and pants,' Crawford said.
10 In the audience, Goldman's stepmother and sister also broke into tears.
11 Crawford said she received a call at about 9:37 p.m. on June 12 from Ms. Simpson's mother asking about her glasses, which she had dropped in the gutter outside. Crawford said she put the glasses in a white envelope, marked it 'Nicole Simpson prescription glasses' and sealed it.
12 Less than 10 minutes later, Ms. Simpson called and asked to talk to Goldman, Crawford said. A few minutes later, Goldman asked Crawford to give him the glasses, she said. Ms. Simpson's condo is about a 10-minute walk from Mezzaluna.
13 'He told me he was going to drop the glasses off at Nicole's,' Crawford said. 'He left at about 10 minutes to 10.'
14 Crawford identified a picture of the bloody envelope found at Goldman's feet, and in court she identified the glasses. Clark displayed Goldman's pants and shirts to show that he had stopped by his house nearby and changed clothes on the way to Ms. Simpson's.
15 Earlier in the day Tuesday, another juror in the case was replaced. And the day ended with a bitter argument between Clark and defense attorney Johnnie Cochran Jr. over a small angel pin the prosecutor had on her lapel.
16 Cochran complained that the pin violated Judge Lance Ito's order that no one in the courtroom could display symbols of support for one side or the other. Ms. Simpson's family has adopted angels as a symbol for her.
17 Ito told Clark the pin was inappropriate in court.
18 Ito's office said a juror was removed because her arthritis doctor may be called as a witness for Simpson, who claims bad knees and arthritis rendered him incapable of carrying out the slayings.
19 The 63-year-old white juror, a retired legal secretary, was replaced by an alternate, a 54-year-old black man and postal operations manager.
20 The anonymous, 12-person jury now has nine blacks, one white and two mixed-race members; there are seven women and five men. Nine alternates remain.
21 Meanwhile, defense attorney Carl Douglas complained that prosecutors failed to disclose until last Friday a home video made outside Simpson's daughter's dance recital just hours before the slayings.
22 The video was shown on Monday to cast doubt on witness accounts of a 'simmering' and 'frightening' Simpson at the recital. It shows Simpson picking up his son, kissing relatives and laughing with a friend.
23 Under law, prosecutors must turn over any material favorable to the defense. Douglas asked for an inquiry into prosecutors' handling of the tape.
24 Prosecutor Christopher Darden brushed off the matter as 'just another innocent mistake' and disputed the value of the video to the defense.
