1 An American AIDS activist said Wednesday he was questioned by Singapore police for two hours after he gave new hypodermic needles to six addicts in exchange for soiled ones used to inject heroin.
2 Jon Stuen-Parker, a former drug addict, runs a controversial program in several U.S. cities called the 'needle exchange program' aimed at preventing users from sharing hypodermic syringes and thereby passing the AIDS virus along.
3 The AIDS virus is transmitted through contact of bodily fluids.
4 Since early 1987, Parker's Boston-based National AIDS Brigade has distributed about 500,000 needles in street corner meetings, swapping them with dirty ones brought over by the addicts. Critics say he is promoting drug use.
5 Parker, a native of Boston, Massachusetts, told the Associated Press that he came to Singapore on Tuesday to expand his international program, now operating in Vietnam and Thailand.
6 He gave six needles plus some AIDS awareness literature to addicts in a poor neighborhood of Singapore.
7 But a policeman, and later officials of the Central Narcotics Bureau 'prohibited me from distributing any more needles,' said Parker, 40.
8 'They said I have to stop doing it immediately. They will not allow this in Singapore,' said Parker, who says he also was warned that he faced arrest. He left for Vietnam on Wednesday.
9 CNB officials were not immediately available for comment.
10 'Drugs are bad, But AIDS is much worse. You can reform a drug addict, but once you have AIDS, it is a costly death. Drugs is the easiest gateway to AIDS,' said Parker who kicked his drug habit while serving two years in jail. He now has a degree in public health from Yale University.
11 Parker said the narcotics officers wanted to know where he met the addicts and asked his help in arresting them. He refused.
12 Drug smuggling in Singapore is punished by mandatory death sentence. Still, the number of drug addicts has risen by 30 percent in the last few years.
13 The government says there are very few drug addicts outside rehab centers, which in August 1994 had 7,700 inmates.
14 According to the government, only seven of the 287 people in Singapore with HIV -- the virus that causes AIDS -- got infected through intravenous drug use. Most got it through sex.
15 Overall, 65 new cases of HIV infection were detected in 1994, a 30 percent increase compared to 50 new cases in 1993. Since 1985, 80 people have died of the disease, and 37 now have full-blown AIDS.
16 In many U.S. states, it is illegal to possess hypodermic needles without a doctor's prescription, and Parker has been arrested dozens of times trying to distribute needles.
17 Although hypodermic syringes can be purchased over the counter in Singapore, it is an offense to possess equipment that can be used to consume drugs, which is punishable by up to 3 years in prison and a fine of dlrs 6,850.
18 Parker said he plans to return in April and distribute needles, ignoring the possibility of being arrested.
