1 Her visit isn't being called official, but officials are very involved in Princess Diana's trip to Japan.
2 The British princess met members of the Japanese royal family Wednesday after last-minute discussions between British and Japanese officials.
3 Just two days before Diana's arrival Monday, both countries had said there were no plans for Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko to meet Diana.
4 And her visit with the crown prince and princess, who both attended Oxford University and are fluent in English, was decided only Tuesday after British officials pressed the Japanese side, said a Japanese palace spokesman, speaking on condition of anonymity.
5 Her trip is being called a private, working trip rather than a state visit.
6 It marks Diana's return to public life after stepping away from the limelight in the wake of her 1993 separation from Prince Charles, heir to the British throne.
7 Diana, 33, showed Wednesday that she hasn't completely lost the popularity she enjoyed in her first visit here, in 1986, with Charles.
8 Her only other visit was with Charles in 1990 for the enthronement of Akihito.
9 There has been nothing like the craze of the first trip, with magazines featuring Diana on the cover, television showing her every move and throngs blocking her every step.
10 But hundreds of excited Japanese waited along her route Wednesday to smile, cheer and try to touch the princess.
11 'Please wave your hand to me,' said one hand-held sign in English.
12 Diana, a kindergarten teacher before she married Charles, on Wednesday visited a children's hospital and centers for the handicapped and mentally ill.
13 Wearing a four-band pearl necklace and a lavender business skirt-suit, she picked up and hugged one little girl with glasses who had wrapped her arms around the princess' legs.
14 Her hair, which generated a plethora of press when she slicked it back recently for a fashion show, was in the more common short, parted style she usually sports.
15 She was quoted as saying she wanted to take some of the children home.
16 Later she met the two royal couples in separate meetings behind closed doors. Details were not disclosed.
17 She also visited the Japan Red Cross, which has been instrumental in aiding victims of last month's earthquake in Kobe, in which nearly 5,300 people died.
18 Diana is the highest official of England's Red Cross and also heads several British children's charities.
19 Plans for Diana to visit Kobe, a port city of 1.4 million people 435 kilometers (270 miles) west of Tokyo, were canceled at the last minute.
20 The Japanese government was concerned about the logistics of arranging a visit to the still devastated area, news reports said.
