1 Former President Kenneth Kaunda vowed Wednesday to fight his way back to power in elections next year, and accused the government of trying to stifle his campaign.
2 Kaunda, 70, said he has already been out on the trail, but several of his rallies were cancelled by police who gave no grounds for their action.
3 The veteran politician, interviewed by the state-controlled Times of Zambia newspaper, said he would defy further bans on political meetings that he charged were ordered by President Frederick Chiluba's governing party.
4 'I will beat them at their own game, because I have gone around most parts of the country and I know what I'm talking about,' he said.
5 Kaunda, defeated by Chiluba's Movement for Multiparty Democracy in 1991 in the first democratic elections since he led the nation to independence from Britain in 1964, also accused the government of failing to pay benefits he was due as a longtime head of state.
6 He had not received a house, two cars or the staff of 10, including three bodyguards, that he was promised after his election defeat.
7 'That is the treatment that I have received at the hands of the so-called democratic and good government which has not even bought or built the house they promised me,' he said.
8 Kaunda said he was living in a home lent to him by a wealthy Lusaka businessman he did not identify.
9 He disclosed he received a monthly pension of dlrs 300 and recently got a dlrs 5,700 check as back pay from the government.
10 He said contrary to rumors that he amassed a huge fortune while in power, he accumulated few savings during 27 years of rule.
11 Kaunda has recently traveled frequently to his traditional stronghold in eastern Zambia, where the party he founded controls all 24 parliamentary constituencies.
12 He stepped down as leader of the United National Independence Party and said he was quitting politics after the 1991 poll, and party officials have cautioned him against making a comeback that could divide the main opposition organization.
13 Kaunda has been accused of 'surreptitious' efforts to topple party leader Kebby Musokotwane, who is supported by young party members. He is said to have rallied old guard loyalists behind him and gone out to win backing from powerful tribal chiefs in remote, impoverished districts where nearly half the population live.
