1 Peru attacked Ecuadorean border posts with helicopter raids and mortar fire, and Ecuador claimed it downed its fourth Peruvian helicopter. Talks resumed in Brazil to end the 2-week-old fighting.
2 In Lima, the Peruvian capital, armed forces chief Gen. Nicolas Hermoza said Peru had dislodged Ecuador's forces from Base Sur and Cueva de los Tayos, two of three posts that Peru says are in its territory.
3 He said his troops had surrounded Tiwintza, the third border post in a disputed area of rugged, jungle-covered mountains 350 kilometers (220 miles) southeast of Quito and 1,000 kilometers (600 miles) north of Lima.
4 Ecuador denied the report, insisting its forces remained in nine border posts that have come under attack since Jan. 26.
5 Unconfirmed news reports in Peru said 150 soldiers have died on both sides in the assault on Tiwintza alone. Hermoza said Peru's total casualties stood at 29, including dead and wounded. Ecuador says 11 Ecuadorean soldiers have died and 26 have been seriously wounded.
6 Both sides claim an unmarked 77-kilometer (48-mile) section of border in the Cordillera del Condor mountains on the eastern edge of the Andes, near the headwaters of the Cenepa River.
7 Ecuador's joint armed forces command said its troops shot down a Peruvian MI-8 helicopter Tuesday during Peruvian attacks on the posts of Coangos and Base Sur. It said that made four choppers shot down by Ecuador in the conflict.
8 Peru said Tuesday that a helicopter had suffered an 'accident' and had not returned to its base. Peru says it has lost two helicopters in the fighting.
9 Peace talks resumed Wednesday afternoon in the Brazilian capital of Brasilia. Ecuador's deputy foreign minister, Marcelo Fernandez de Cordova, said he and his Peruvian counterpart, Eduardo Ponce Vizanco, had met alone for the first time since talks began last week in Rio de Janeiro. He would not say what the two discussed.
10 Peru on Tuesday rejected an amended cease-fire proposal from Ecuador, which is under pressure from Latin American and U.S. diplomats to accept a settlement worked out last weekend in Rio. Peru had agreed to sign the accord.
11 Peru has pressed for an eight-ilometer-wide (five-mile-wide) demilitarized zone. Ecuador has been willing to accept a zone just a kilometer (half-mile) wide.
