1 Prosecutors urged one of President and Mrs. Clintons' former Whitewater partners to plead guilty and cooperate with investigators, but she turned aside their request, sources familiar with the discussion said.
2 Susan McDougal met for an hour Wednesday with Whitewater prosecutors in Little Rock, Arkansas, maintaining that she's done nothing wrong.
3 Clinton was governor of Arkansas and Hillary Rodham Clinton was a lawyer for the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock during most of the 14 years they were involved in Whitewater, a failed real estate venture the Clintons say they invested and lost dlrs 68,900 in.
4 In addition to being the Clintons' partners in Whitewater Development Corp., Jim and Susan McDougal owned an Arkansas savings and loan, Madison Guaranty, that collapsed in 1989, costing taxpayers dlrs 65 million.
5 Prosecutors are trying to determine whether any depositors' funds from the McDougals' S and L were diverted to Whitewater or to Bill Clinton's gubernatorial campaigns.
6 Sources said prosecutors urged Susan McDougal to start cooperating immediately with the investigation or face indictment. The sources spoke on condition of anonymity.
7 One of her attorneys, Bobby McDaniel, disputed that account, describing the session as a 'get-acquainted-type meeting.'
8 'Susan McDougal was not threatened with an indictment today,' he said. 'Susan McDougal did state to the prosecutors that she would not be interested in any plea negotiations, whether it be a felony or a misdemeanor.'
9 Mrs. McDougal was buoyant after the hour-long meeting.
10 'I really want the whole Whitewater thing to come to a resolution. I'm really excited about that maybe happening soon,' she said.
11 The prosecutors met with Susan McDougal after issuing a new round of subpoenas -- including several to current White House aides.
12 Subpoenaed Clinton aides were directed by prosecutors in Little Rock to turn over any documents pertaining to Whitewater or to Jim and Susan McDougal.
13 Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth Starr 'has issued a series of subpoenas,' and 'a small number' of White House employees received the subpoenas, said Jane Sherburne of the White House counsel's office.
14 Less than half a dozen current White House employees were subpoenaed, said an administration source, speaking on condition of anonymity.
