1 On a night of down-to-the-wire finishes in the National Hockey League, there wasn't a game more dramatic than the one between the Toronto Maple Leafs and Dallas Stars.
2 'We played a strong game but I wish the game had started two seconds earlier,' said Dallas coach Bob Gainey following a 3-3 tie with the Maple Leafs on Wednesday night.
3 The Maple Leafs salvaged the draw when Mats Sundin flipped the puck over sprawling goaltender Andy Moog with 1.6 seconds left in regulation.
4 'I think there were four guys laying on top of (teammate Dave) Andreychuk and they didn't pay too much attention to me,' Sundin said. 'The puck came out and I had a few seconds there to put it in. Moog was down so I thought, `If you're going to get it in, you've got to get it up on him.''
5 The Maple Leafs-Stars game in Toronto highlighted a night of tight games in which Winnipeg tied Edmonton 3-3 on Teemu Selanne's goal with 2:08 left and the New York Rangers beat Washington 5-4 on Brian Leetch's goal with 4:19 remaining.
6 Elsewhere, it was Quebec 3-2 over Hartford, and Montreal 4-2 over Ottawa.
7 With Toronto goaltender Felix Potvin on the bench in favor of an extra attacker, the Leafs blitzed the Dallas crease. Moog was lying along the goal line as the puck bounced around at the front of the crease. Sundin, free to one side, lifted it under the crossbar just before time expired.
8 Dean Evason's rebound goal with 2:26 remaining had given Dallas a 3-2 lead. Dmitri Mironov and Mike Eastwood also scored for the Leafs, while Mike Modano scored the other Dallas goal.
9 The Stars had lost four of their five previous games, so they were happy with the point.
10 'We've got to walk before we can run,' Moog said. 'We've had a tough time lately so I think that's a good point for us, no matter how it ended.'
11 Selanne's tying goal at Edmonton was his second of the game.
12 Both of Selanne's goals came on the power play, including his first of the night at 17:08 of the first period. Selanne's performance gave him 17 points, tying him for the NHL scoring lead with Quebec's Joe Sakic.
13 Also scoring for the Jets was Igor Korolev, his first of the year. David Oliver, Jason Arnott and Todd Marchant scored for Edmonton.
14 'When the team isn't playing so well, you can't be so happy,' said Selanne, whose Jets have managed just two wins and three ties in 10 games. 'Sometimes we play just 55 minutes or two periods, that's not enough to win hockey games in the NHL. We have to start playing better . we have a good team but we haven't proven anything yet.'
15 At New York, the Rangers won a battle of special teams as Brian Leetch scored a power-play goal with 4:19 left to beat Washington.
16 Leetch's game-winner, his first goal of the season, capped a Rangers rally that saw them come back twice from two-goal deficits and a one-goal deficit in the third.
17 Sergei Zubov had a goal and three assists for the Rangers, who had four power-play goals and a shorthanded goal to three power-play goals for Washington.
18 'We were confident we could come back and win the game,' said Mark Messier, who had the Rangers' shorthanded goal. 'When we got behind, we started slapping each other on the pads and telling each other we could do it.'
19 Peter Bondra scored Washington's third power-play goal of the game, and his second of the night, at 3:46 of the third period to give the Caps a 4-3 lead.
20 At Hartford, Mike Ricci broke a tie with the first of Quebec's two power-play goals in the third period.
21 With Paul Ranheim serving a penalty and the score tied 1-1, Ricci backhanded the rebound of Sakic's shot from the left point past Sean Burke 8:19 into the third period.
22 Valeri Kamensky added another power-play goal for Quebec at 10:43, which ended up being the game-winner when Ranheim scored for Hartford with six minutes remaining.
23 At Ottawa, Brian Bellows continued his scoring streak with two goals for Montreal.
24 The veteran left wing, scoreless through Montreal's first six games, has five goals in his last three.
25 Kirk Muller and Bryan Fogarty also scored as Montreal recorded its first road win of the season.
