1 Russia has delivered the first of four new patrol submarines that will dramatically improve China's fleet and has raised fears of new Chinese aggression in Asia and the Pacific.
2 Robert Karniol, Asia-Pacific editor of Jane's Defense Weekly, said the $1 billion deal for the advanced Kilo-class diesel vessels was signed in November.
3 The first sub is on a Chinese merchant ship heading for China, Karniol said Thursday.
4 'This is a major generational jump from China's current fleet, and there are fears that it could use the vessels to push its own interests in the region,' he said by telephone from his officd in Bangkok, Thailand.
5 The diesel submarines can stay at sea for several weeks and have sophisticated search-and-attack sonars.
6 Russia's Defense Ministry and the state arms export agency that reportedly brokered the deal refused comment Thursday. The Chinese Defense Ministry had no immediate comment.
7 Karniol, who first reported the sale in the Nov. 19 issue of Jane's Defense Weekly, said Russia's decision to sell 'its most advanced technology' to China is worrisome to other countries in the region.
8 Taiwan, for instance, fears a naval blockade by China, which regards it as a wayward province.
9 On Wednesday, Philippines President Fidel Ramos accused China of stationing craft that 'looked like warships' in part of the oil-rich Spratly Islands. China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia and Brunei all claim part or all of the archipelago.
10 The 1994-95 edition of Jane's Fighting Ships says China has about 50 submarines, including two strategic missile subs, five attack subs and 39 obsolescent Ming and Romeo class patrol subs. It says China's reported purchase of Kilo class subs was 'a logical step forward.'
11 John Downing, naval research and information officer at the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, said the Russian deal was part of China's long-term, navy-led upgrade of its forces.
12 Russia has been selling surplus military equipment to many countries. According to Russian media reports, its arms sales to China for 1992 and 1993 were worth up to $3 billion.
13 Russia launched its Kilo program in 1979. According to Jane's Fighting Ships, it also has exported Kilo-class submarines to Poland, Romania and Algeria. It said further transfers are expected to Iran, and Syria is also likely to become a customer.
