1 An estimated 4,000 striking workers marched through the capital of this French island Thursday in sympathy with bank employees who walked off the job three weeks ago calling for higher pay.
2 All nine of Martinique's non-banking sector unions had called a two-day general strike starting Thursday as a show of support for the bank employees. The unions represent both public and private workers on this island of 360,000.
3 Compliance with the strike varied. Only about 20 teachers stayed home, but nearly all shops in Fort-de-France were closed. Activity continued as usual at the airport and hotels and water and electricity service weren't interrupted.
4 The march lasted for three hours and ended at the unions' headquarters. No violence was reported.
5 Many workers apparently didn't heed the strike call because they were disgruntled that the bank strike had dragged on so long.
6 There was no immediate reaction from either local or French authorities.
7 Employees of the island's five major banks and three of its financial institutions, including one that functions as its central bank, walked out Jan. 18. The strike has choked local commerce.
8 With the central bank out of operation, no money is circulating among the banks that remain open. It's difficult to get cash because automatic teller machines aren't stocked. Shops aren't selling because people don't have cash and many residents don't have credit cards.
9 Some merchants have bought radio announcements urging people to buy -- and pay with checks.
10 Talks resumed Monday but broke off the same day after the two sides deadlocked on the matter of salaries.
11 Dozens of bank employees, who haven't had a raise for five years, are asking for a 2.5 percent increase this year. Their average salary is 9,500 francs ($1,792) per month, on an island where the minimum wage is about 5,000 francs ($943) per month.
12 Banks say they're losing money and can't afford a wage hike of more than 2.2 percent.
13 The island's economy has been in recession for two or three years and unemployment is about 30 percent. Inflation is running at about 2 percent this year.
