1 Razmi Yousef, arrested and deported to the United States as the principal suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, was sought here last month in what police believed was a plot to kill Pope John Paul II.
2 The 27-year-old Iraqi native was arrested Tuesday in Pakistan and secretly flown to the United States in a U.S. government plane. In New York on Thursday, he pleaded innocent to 11 counts relating to the Feb. 26, 1993, bombing of the Manhattan landmark.
3 Yousef's name surfaced here after police raided an apartment Jan. 6 a few blocks from where Pope John Paul II was to stay during his visit to the Philippines. The pontiff arrived Jan. 12 and left for New Guinea four days later.
4 Police released few details of the incident. After the pope left, they said agents arrested two Middle Easterners and seized Bibles, pictures of the pope, maps of his routes and bomb-making equipment.
5 Police spokesman Arturo Lomibao said Yousef was among three people who eluded arrest and were being sought. He apparently slipped out of the country.
6 Three days after the raid, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration issued a security alert to U.S. airlines operating in the Pacific. The order resulted in tightened security on all U.S. aircraft, including restrictions on hand-carried items.
7 Police sources here said investigators feared 'terrorists' might try to slip a 'liquid bomb,' virtually impossible to detect, on an American plane.
8 It was not the first time the Philippines has been linked to Middle Eastern terrorism. In January 1991, an Iraqi intelligence agent was killed and another gravely injured when a bomb apparently intended for a U.S. library exploded prematurely in suburban Makati.
9 The Iraqi charge d'affaires and two other Iraqis were deported in the incident, which occurred during the buildup to the U.S.-led Operation Desert Storm to drive Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
10 It was the only terrorist attack against U.S. targets clearly linked to Iraq during the Desert Storm era.
11 reid
