1 President Ernesto Zedillo ordered the arrest of Subcomandante Marcos and other leaders of last year's Indian rebellion on Thursday, a day after federal agents uncovered what he called major weapons caches and plans for 'new and greater acts of violence' across Mexico.
2 In a surprise, nationwide TV address, Zedillo said he had directed the army to increase patrols and to help keep order in the southern state of Chiapas, where the Indian rebellion erupted on Jan. 1, 1994.
3 At least 145 people were killed in fighting until a cease-fire was called 12 days later. Several attempts at negotiating peace with the rebels have floundered, but the cease-fire has remained in effect.
4 Zedillo said federal judicial police on Wednesday discovered large, clandestine arsenals kept by the Zapatista National Liberation Army rebels in Mexico City and the Gulf Coast state of Veracruz.
5 The caches included high-powered weapons such as hand-grenades, mortar heads and explosives, he said.
6 Federal agents also uncovered a conspiracy for widespread violence by the rebels, Zedillo said.
7 He said Marcos, the ski-masked rebel leader and spokesman, and five other rebel leaders had been identified and arrest warrants were issued.
8 Zedillo said the Zapatistas had rejected a number of attempts to reach a peace accord by his administration -- some even before he took office Dec. 1.
9 While the government was striving to negotiate peace, the Zapatistas 'were preparing new and greater acts of violence, not only in Chiapas, but in others places in the country,' Zedillo said.
10 The Zapatistas launched their New Year's rebellion to demand better living conditions and respect for human rights for Maya-descended Indians in Chiapas and for poor Mexicans nationwide.
11 But Zedillo called them the leftovers 'of a guerrilla group formed in 1969 in another state called the National Liberation Forces, which advocated seizing power through armed force.'
12 National Liberation, a leftist guerrilla group, was active in the northern state of Nuevo Leon and in southern Guerrero state at the time, but was crushed by the army.
13 Zedillo said Marcos' real name is Rafael Sebastian Guillen Vicente. He identified the other leaders only as Fernando Yaffez, alias Subcomandante German; Jorge Javier Elorreaga Berdegue, alias Subcomandante Vicente; Jorge Santiago Santiago; and Silvia Fernandez Hernandez, alias Subcomandante Sofia or Gabriela.
14 Zedillo said the army will help federal judicial police arrest all six in Chiapas. He also said he has ordered the army to increase patrols in the state and take necessary action to keep law and order.
15 The president announced he would call a special session of Congress on the conflict in Chiapas. He said he was submitting legislation to grant amnesty to Zapatistas who surrendered their weapons and joined the nation's political mainstream.
