1 He arrived in New York on an Iraqi passport, masterminded the World Trade Center blast and fled before the smoke had cleared, authorities say.
2 Using a string of aliases, he then hopscotched the globe, leaving clues of unsuccessful bombing attacks allegedly planned for the Philippines and Thailand.
3 Finally, after two years as a fugitive, the mysterious Ramzi Ahmed Yousef was captured in a hotel room in Islamabad, Pakistan.
4 The 27-year-old suspect was lying peacefully on a bed Tuesday morning when Pakistani police and U.S. law enforcement officers broke in, according to the officials, who requested anonymity.
5 'The blood ran out of his face,' said one official, adding that Yousef did not put up a struggle.
6 Yousef was put on a U.S. government plane and flown to New York. He pleaded innocent Thursday to 11 counts relating to the Feb. 26, 1993, Trade Center bombing, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000. He was being held without bond, at least until his next court appearance on Wednesday.
7 Once they entered his hotel room, the arresting agents had no trouble identifying Yousef: his scarred, deformed hands are a terrorist trademark, U.S. officials said.
8 Bomb-making components were also found in Yousef's possession. Some explosives were hidden inside two toy cars, Pakistani Interior Minister Nasirullah Babar said.
9 U.S. officials said they were tipped off by a confidential informant in Pakistan who was motivated, in part, by the dlrs 2 million reward offered by the U.S. government. Pakistani officials said they had Yousef under surveillance since he entered the country from Bangkok, Thailand, on Sunday.
10 Officials in Pakistan said Yousef was traveling under the alias of Ali Khan -- one of many names he has employed over the years -- but gave conflicting accounts of whether he was using Iraqi or Pakistani travel documents.
11 Yousef was carrying an Iraqi passport when he arrived in the United States in September 1992, but his nationality is uncertain. He has lived in Iraq and Kuwait, and U.S. officials believe he received military training from Afghan rebel groups that maintained bases in western Pakistan.
12 Yousef, who lived with two other bombing suspects in Jersey City, New Jersey, escaped the night of the bombing and fled to Iraq via Pakistan.
13 The FBI said it almost nabbed Yousef last month in the Philippines, where he was linked to a failed plot to assassinate the pope, but Yousef slipped out of Manila.
14 The New York Times, citing unnamed U.S. officials, reported Friday that Yousef also is a suspect in a March 1994 plot in Thailand in which Islamic fundamentalists tried to explode a one-ton bomb near the Israeli Embassy in Bangkok.
15 According the FBI and court documents, Yousef helped buy, mix and store chemicals used to make the bomb exploded under the twin 110-story Trade Center towers. His fingerprints were found on two bomb-making manuals seized by authorities and on containers of bomb-making chemicals.
