1 A mother was reunited with her newborn baby on Saturday a day after it disappeared from a hospital maternity ward.
2 Police had hunted the four-day-old baby girl kidnapped from the ward, apparently by a woman who befriended the child's mother.
3 Christine Owens appeared on the Independent Television News cradling her healthy baby, Lydia later in the evening.
4 Police said they had returned the baby to Mrs. Owens, but would not describe the circumstances.
5 'A man and a woman from the Rhyll area of north Wales are helping us with our inquiries,' an unidentified police officer told the TV news.
6 Britain's second baby snatch in less than a year focused new attention on hospital security measures.
7 Police said the dark-haired woman they believe took Lydia Owens Friday from Glan Clwyd General Hospital at Bodelwyddan in north Wales, was aged 30-40 and carried a large bag.
8 She approached Mrs. Owens, at the door to the maternity ward at the end of the evening visiting hour at about 8 p.m. (2000 GMT), Det. Supt. Peter Ackerley told a news conference Saturday.
9 'The woman engaged Mrs. Owens in general conversation and they went into the ward and visited Lydia's cot,' said Ackerley.
10 The two women had coffee and continued chatting about babies in a nearby room before the unknown woman left, he said.
11 'A short time later Lydia was found to be missing from the ward.'
12 Mrs. Owens, 32, from nearby Llandudno, made a public plea for the return of her baby, saying she would not press to punish the kidnaper.
13 'I don't care about anything, I just want her to bring my baby back, she's got her brother and sister at home and the little girl is asking for her,' she told the British Broadcasting Corp., sobbing.
14 'I haven't told my daughter anything,' Mrs. Owens said. 'But she has been asking every day when the baby is coming home.'
15 Police said they would study tapes from the hospital's security cameras to see if the abductor had been filmed taking Lydia, who was born Tuesday, weighing 6 1/2 pounds (2.92-kilograms).
16 A Royal Air Force helicopter joined police with tracker dogs searching the hospital grounds and surrounding fields.
17 Many hospitals tightened security after a woman posing as a nurse snatched baby Abbie Humphries from Queen's Medical Center in the northern English town of Nottingham on July 1.
18 Police, acting on a telephone tip, traced the woman and baby on July 16.
19 Chief Executive Grenville Kershaw said Glan Clwyd General Hospital had increased security after the Abbie Humphries incident. More security cameras had been installed and all staff were now required to wear official identity tags, he said.
20 But he said it was not possible for hospitals to be 100 percent secure.
21 Such institutions, he said, are 'essentially public places. Many visitors and relatives come in and it's impossible to keep track of everyone.'
