1 ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (AP) - A South African religious student, motivated by the offer of a dlrs 2 million reward, gave U.S. officials the tip that led to the capture of World Trade Center bombing suspect Ramzi Yousef, a newspaper reported Sunday.
2 South African Istiaque Parker, his wife Fehmida, and their baby have since been whisked away by American officials and are now at an undisclosed location in the United States, according The News, an English-language daily, which cited unidentified sources.
3 U.S. officials have said an informant guided them to Yousef, but they have refused to release any information on the person or his whereabouts.
4 Parker and his family have not been seen publicly since Tuesday's arrest of Yousef, who was extradited to New York and charged with the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
5 Parker contacted the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad last month to say he knew Yousef, according to The News.
6 At the Rana Market, where the Parker family lived in an apartment above a row of shops, many believed Parker was the informant.
7 'Mr. Parker knew Yousef and we immediately thought that he was the one who gave the tip,' Salman Ghauri, who runs a video shop just below Parker's apartment, said Saturday. Parker, who's in his mid-20s, often rented movies from the store.
8 Parker apparently met Yousef through the Islamic University in Islamabad, where Parker has been a student for the past three years.
9 When Yousef came to Islamabad on Monday, he went to Parker's apartment and the student then escorted the suspect to the Su-Casa Guest House, which was just across the street. The two also went out for coffee that night, said hotel manager Musawar Qazi.
10 The next morning, Pakistani and U.S. law enforcement officials burst into the hotel and asked the front desk worker, 'Where is room 16?' The clerk pointed to the second floor and the officials rushed upstairs where they found Yousef, tied him up, blindfolded him and took him away, Qazi said.
11 Shortly afterward, six U.S. and Pakistani officials walked across the street, went directly to Parker's apartment and entered without resorting to force, said Ghauri.
12 Carrying cameras and video equipment, they spent hours inside the apartment. They left without questioning any of the shopkeepers or neighbors who knew Parker, according to several witnesses.
13 The Parker family was gone by the time law enforcement officials arrived and they have not been back to the apartment since, according to people at the Rana Market who normally saw him coming and going daily.
14 The News reported Friday that Parker had been arrested by Pakistani police. But police and government officials told The Associated Press that they knew nothing about Parker.
15 Officials at the South African mission said they were trying to locate Parker and his family.
16 'We're very concerned and we are following up,' said an official who asked not to be named.
17 South African officials knew Parker well and said he sometimes was short of money. Last year, he asked a South African diplomat for a loan so he and his wife could fly home to Cape Town. He promptly repaid the money when he returned.
18 In a related development, Pakistan has asked the United States for a share of the reward money for Yousef's capture, The News reported.
19 'Without our help, (Yousef) could not have been apprehended,' Interior Minister Nasirullah Babar told the newspaper.
20 Yousef, an Iraqi, is alleged to be the mastermind of the Feb. 26, 1993, World Trade Center bombing in New York that left six dead and some 1,000 injured. He pleaded innocent Thursday and is scheduled to make another court appearance this week.
