1 Ten foreign aid workers held hostage for up to three days by rebels arrived in Kenya on Sunday, tired and traumatized but otherwise in good health.
2 An eleventh colleague, a Kenyan, left to be with his family, said Sally Burnheim, a spokeswoman for the U.N. Operation Lifeline Sudan, which acts as umbrella for aid agencies in the war and famine ravage region.
3 The former hostages have refused to talk to journalists about their ordeal until after they're debriefed Monday, said Burnheim.
4 'Besides, they are tired and traumatized,' Burnheim said. 'Some of them went for long periods without food and water.'
5 The workers were captured in an attack in southern Sudan by about 130 guerrillas loyal to Gordon Koang Babyping, a renegade commander of rebel Sudan Peoples' Liberation Army.
6 The workers were seized Wednesday in a village about 120 kilometers (75 miles) west of Ethiopia. They included two French, two Kenyans, an Australian, two Ethiopians, a Swiss. They worked for Medicins du Monde, UNICEF and the Swiss Disaster Relief.
7 Six workers were freed Thursday and Friday in exchange for sandals, tires and bags of maize, said Burnheim. The others were freed Saturday without further demands by the guerillas, 'a rag tag lot,' Burnheim said. All were picked in a propeller plane
8 She said the U.N. and private agencies evacuated workers from the area Saturday.
9 Burnheim said they hope to return to some areas within 48 hours, had did not know how many relief workers were relocated.
10 'We sincerely hope this doesn't happen again. But it's a symptom of the growing insecurity in the region,' she said.
11 Decades of fighting between the government in Sudan and southern rebels has devastated the region about the size of France. An estimated 1 million people have died in the fighting and war-aggravated farming. Hundreds of others have fled their homes or to neighboring countries.
12 Since its founding in 1983, the rebel movement split into a number of factions due to ethnic and leadership squabbles. Fighting among the factions has allowed the government to recapture towns Sudan initially lost to the insurgents.
