1 Negotiations on better Chinese protection of U.S. copyrights, patents and trademarks are scheduled to resume Tuesday afternoon, a U.S. Embassy spokesman said Monday.
2 The first full day of talks will be Wednesday, the spokesman said.
3 The negotiations are an attempt to avert a trade war between the countries over enforcement of intellectual property rights protection.
4 U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor has said substantial progress must be made on stopping piracy of U.S. movies, films and software by Feb. 26.
5 If no progress is made, the United States says it will impose punitive tariffs of up to 100 percent on about dlrs 1 billion of Chinese exports to the United States.
6 China has responded with its own list of retaliatory measures that take effect if U.S. sanctions are imposed.
7 The United States wants China to take such steps as shutting down production lines for pirated compact discs and stopping the use of pirated software in government departments.
8 China has said it already has made a great deal of progress in strengthening enforcement of its laws protecting intellectual property rights. It has accused the United States of making unreasonable demands.
9 The U.S. team, headed by assistant U.S. trade representative Lee Sands, was scheduled to arrive in Beijing on Monday.
10 The Chinese press this week has carried reports about how courts have imposed heavy punishments for piracy.
11 For example, the director of a car muffler factory in east China's Zhejiang province was sentenced to 6 1-2 years in prison and fined 30,000 yuan by a court in Shanghai last year for counterfeiting the Volkswagen trademark, the Xinhua News Agency reported Monday.
12 The counterfeit scheme netted Jiang Zhijiang, the factory director, 1.5 million yuan (nearly dlrs 180,000), the report said.
13 Shanghai courts handled 225 intellectual property rights cases in 1994, an increase of nearly 6 percent from 1993, the report said.
14 Another report, in Sunday's Legal Daily (Fazhi Ribao), said Beijing courts dealt with 448 disputes over patents and other intellectual property over the past three years and resolved 91 percent of them.
