1 The bloody war in Chechnya is likely to spread to surrounding areas of the Russian Federation, a top Red Cross official just returned from the breakaway republic said Monday.
2 'I feel there will be an extension of war,' said Jean-Marc Bornet, the International Committee for the Red Cross representative for Central Asia.
3 Bornet spoke to reporters after he made a week's visit to Grozny and surrounding areas embroiled in the conflict between Russia and Muslim separatists. The Swiss-run ICRC is the main international organization providing aid to war victims inside Chechnya.
4 Bornet said he feared that as many as 500,000 people could flee to the neighboring Caucasus republics of Dagestan, which flanks the Caspian Sea, and Ingushetia, which lies inland.
5 'It is not unrealistic to believe that they will export the conflict to the neighboring regions,' he said.
6 There are more than 400,000 displaced people in the region, according to estimates by the Red Cross. Up to 250,000 people have fled to the southern part of Chechnya, Bornet said. More than 100,000 have taken refuge in Ingushetia, and about 60,000 in Dagestan.
7 While there is no precise figure, Bornet said that tens of thousands of people have lost their lives in the battle for the Chechen capital of Grozny and in fighting in nearby towns.
8 Only 40,000 to 50,000 people, or about one-tenth the pre-war population, remain in Grozny, Bornet said. Many Chechens have fled to homes of friends and relatives in the southern part of the country.
9 The complete infrastructure of Grozny has been destroyed, including water, electricity and heat. The Red Cross is handing out clothing, covers and plastic sheets to protect against the cold weather, Bornet told reporters.
10 The Red Cross estimates it needs dlrs 42.8 million to provide humanitarian aid to displaced people in region for the first six months of 1995. Bornet said the initial response from donor countries has been positive.
11 After nearly two months of negotiation, Bornet said Red Cross staff have been allowed to visit both Russian and Chechen prisoners of war. He reported 'serious problems' in the treatment of Chechen prisoners being transfered from Grozny to Mozdok, a city northwest of Chechnya where the Russians are holding an undetermined number of rebel prisoners.
12 Russian Federation officials have not yet agreed to a 'humanitarian truce' that would allow civilians in Grozny to leave, the evacuation of injured people, and the collection and burial of the dead, Bornet said.
13 Starting next month, Red Cross officials plan to begin delivering 100,000 parcels of enough rice, oil, sugar and other food items to feed a family for about a month. Also, the committee plans to supply basic food items and medical supplies to hospitals.
