1 Russia's help in rebuilding an Iranian nuclear power plant is cause for concern and should cease, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Monday.
2 But Christopher tried to discourage Congress from cutting aid to Russia, saying U.S.-financed programs there serve American interests.
3 The plant is being rebuilt near the port town of Bushehr, raising concern that Iran's aim is production of plutonium, a nuclear-bomb making material present in the spent fuel of civilian power plants.
4 Iran insists the program is designed for civilian use, but Christopher suggested a more ominous goal. While not directly accusing Tehran of pursuing a weapons program, he said Russia's provision of technology 'should not go forward' because it enhanced Iran's capacity.
5 'We're deeply concerned,' he said in an exchange with reporters while he welcomed Bulgarian President Zhelyu Zhelev to the State Department for a meeting over lunch.
6 Christopher complimented Zhelev, a leading dissident when Bulgaria was under communist rule, for pursuing political and economic reform despite obstacles, including the business it has lost with Serbia by subscribing to U.N. economic sanctions.
7 Zhelev reaffirmed that commitment, and said Bulgaria needed U.S. help.
8 About 3,000 Russian workers are expected to help Iran rebuild the plant under an $800 million contract. The plant was started in the 1970s under the late Shah or Iran and then abandoned after he was overthrown in 1979.
9 The plant was started by German engineers and is expected to have two 1,200 megawatt reactors.
10 Russian President Boris Yeltsin assured President Clinton at a summit meeting here last year that no new military technology contracts would be signed with Iran. But ongoing deals were not suspended.
11 Christopher said the United States regarded Iran as 'a proponent of terrorism' and was talking with U.S. allies about not giving Tehran trade privileges or furnishing Iran with the means to produce weapons of mass destruction.
12 On the other hand, U.S. aid to Russia is not a 'gratuity or a favor' but 'in our interests,' Christopher said.
