1 The man accused of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing is suspected of planting a bomb on a Philippine airliner that killed a passenger in December, the national police chief said Monday.
2 Director General Recaredo Sarmiento said the bombing, which killed a Japanese passenger, was 'a dry run' for a terror campaign against U.S. carriers in the Far East. He said the campaign was to have included attacks on unspecified foreign embassies in Manila.
3 Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, arrested last week in Pakistan and deported to the United States, also was involved in a plot to kill Pope John Paul II during his visit to Manila last month, Sarmiento said.
4 On Dec. 11, a bomb exploded aboard a Philippine Airlines flight bound for Tokyo from the central Philippine city of Cebu. The pilot landed the plane safely on Okinawa, but one person was killed and five others injured.
5 A Filipino Muslim extremist group claimed responsibility, but police doubt it was capable of the attack.
6 Sarmiento said the bomb was made of the same materials recovered from an apartment believed to have been rented in Manila by Yousef under the name Naji Haddad, who presented a Moroccan passport.
7 The apartment, which was rented about five days before the Philippine Airline bombing, is about 100 yards from the Vatican ambassador's residence, where the pope stayed during his visit to Manila.
8 Authorities said they raided the apartment Jan. 6 after a suspicious fire and discovered bomb-making materials. The man registered as Haddad, which means 'Mr. Smith' in Arabic, escaped, but another man was arrested.
9 'Maps of the Papal route, a computer, documents, timing devices and other materials that could be used in manufacture of explosives were seized,' Sarmiento said. 'The room was listed under the name Naji Owaidah Haddad, who after further analysis of the seized documents turned out to be Ramzi Yousef.'
10 In January 1991, an Iraqi intelligence agent was killed and another gravely wounded when a bomb apparently intended for the U.S. Thomas Jefferson Library in suburban Makati exploded prematurely.
11 Three other Iraqis, including Baghdad's top diplomat here, were deported.
