1 A Dublin professor has unearthed hundreds of previously unknown works by the English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge in a hunt that took him as far as Russia and Australia.
2 There also are many new versions of known Coleridge poems, but nothing to compare with his masterpieces like 'Kubla Khan' and 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,' according to Jim Mays, head of the English Department at University College, Dublin.
3 Mays plans to publish his discoveries later this year. In all, he says he found about 300 poems. About 500 Coleridge poems were already known.
4 The Sunday Times said Monday the new works range from two-line fragments to manuscripts 10 pages long and were found in private collections, homes and libraries.
5 It quoted Mays as saying Coleridge did not stop writing poetry around 1810, as had been thought. Coleridge died in 1834.
6 'The 1820s saw a kind of renaissance. He kept writing poems. Whenever he felt anything intensely, it came out in verse,' Mays was quoted as saying.
7 Mays declined to give further interviews about the book, a spokeswoman for the university said Monday.
8 The Sunday Times said the poems spoke of homosexuality, gout and ingrown toenails, among other topics. Another poem, titled 'An Autograph of an Autopergamene,' apparently was written in blood on a piece of the poet's skin that peeled off in the bath.
9 Coleridge dictated poems to assistants, wrote them in guests' journals, added them to autographs and scribbled revisions over printed works. Mays used that knowledge to help in his search for the new works.
10 It said Mays found the texts in Britain, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Middle East, South Africa, France, Switzerland and Russia.
11 One poem was found hanging on the wall at the home of Denise Coleridge, whose late husband was a great-great-grandson of the poet. The poem was to the poet's son, Hartley, to help him remember the Greek alphabet.
12 Mays said he found more than 100 variations of 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner' and 25 of the unfinished poem 'Christabel.' It was not clear whether any of the versions was a completed one.
