1 President Nelson Mandela accepted an apology Tuesday from his estranged wife, Winnie, for calling his government weak and unresponsive but warned against further breaks from his leadership.
2 Mrs. Mandela's apology came in the second of two letters to her husband on Monday. The first defended her criticism of the government during a Feb. 4 funeral for a slain policeman but contained no apology. The second letter, later Monday, was more contrite.
3 'I would like to apologize most sincerely for the impression the speech caused that I sought to condemn the government,' the second letter said, according to the South African Press Association.
4 In his response, Mandela called Mrs. Mandela's criticism 'inconsistent' with her position in the government but said he accepted the apology.
5 'Ministers and deputy ministers are custodians of the policy of the government of the day,' the statement read. 'Their acceptance of positions in the government obliges them not only to help formulate policy in the relevant fora, but also to implement to the letter the decisions of the government.'
6 He concluded by saying he would 'not hesitate to act firmly' against any future shows of disrespect or disregard for policies and decisions of his government.
7 Mrs. Mandela is deputy minister of arts, culture and technology in the Cabinet formed by her husband after the African National Congress won the nation's first all-race election last April.
8 Her popularity among militant young blacks makes her a powerful figure in the ANC and forced Mandela to give her a significant government post. She has called repeatedly for the ANC-led government to move faster to improve the lives of poor blacks and wipe out the vestiges of apartheid.
9 Continuing controversy over her inflammatory statements, along with allegations of financial irregularities, could bring a showdown between the couple that separated in 1992.
10 In 1991, Mrs. Mandela was convicted of kidnapping in a case involving four young men beaten by her bodyguards. One of the victims was later found killed. Mrs. Mandela eventually paid a fine and never went to prison.
11 She faced revolt this week from officials of the ANC Women's League she heads. Eleven of the 25 top leaders of the league said they would resign, complaining Mrs. Mandela made decisions without consulting them.
