1 George Foreman vs. Mike Tyson. Big George likes the sound of it, as long as . -- Tyson gets out of jail as scheduled on March 25. -- Foreman beats Axel Schulz on April 22 in the first defense of his heavyweight championship. -- And Don King stays out of it.
2 'I can't put up with Don King in my life,' Foreman said. 'I've got too many kids already.'
3 The 46-year-old Foreman was in New York on Tuesday to officially announce his first title defense since 1974. He will fight the 26-year-old Schulz, a former East German amateur champion, at the MGM Grand Garden in Las Vegas.
4 'I heard Tyson was getting out of the jailhouse pretty quick, and he said if he gets out today, he'll whip George tomorrow,' Foreman said. 'I'd like to give him that opportunity.
5 'If he doesn't sign up with Don King again, it will happen before the end of the year. If I beat Axel Schulz, if Tyson gets out and if he gets away from Don King, it can happen. It would be the greatest show since P.T. and Barnum got together for their thing. But I've got to beat Axel Schulz first.'
6 Foreman recaptured the title, becoming the oldest world heavyweight champion, last Nov. 5 with a 10th-round knockout of Michael Moorer, who held the WBA and IBF belts. When Tyson won the world title from Trevor Berbick in 1986 at age 20, he was the youngest world champion.
7 'If the youngest guy to become heavyweight champion fights me, the oldest guy, then I can prove this wasn't a fluke,' Foreman said. 'But if I look past Axel Schulz the way Michael Moorer looked past me, I won't get that chance.
8 'You see, Moorer believed everything he heard. George was old, and that's true. George was fat, and that's true. George was slow, and that's true. George can't punch, and that was a lie,' Foreman said. 'If you can still punch, you can still fight.'
9 Foreman brings a record of 73-4 with 68 knockouts into the fight, while Schulz is 21-1-1 with 10 kockouts. In his last fight, Schulz won a 10-round decision over James 'Bonecrusher' Smith in Germany on Sept. 17.
10 This will be Schulz's third fight in the United States. He scored a 10-round decision over Kimmuel Odum in Atlantic City, N.J., in 1993 and won a 10-round decision over Jack Basting in Chicago last June 18. The rest of his fights have been in Germany.
11 'I think youth and endurance will speak for me in the fight,' Schulz said. 'He is, of course, a legend, but that's an incentive more than anything else. I am not in awe of him in the least.'
12 To televise the fight, HBO paid an estimated dlrs 9 million rights fee, the highest in network history. It's small change compared with what Foreman-Tyson could generate.
13 Bob Arum, who is promoting the Foreman-Schulz fight, said a Tyson bout could generate as much as dlrs 250 million gross with dlrs 100 million left to split among the contestants and the promotion.
14 'We have offered Mike Tyson the fight for a record amount, and he's very interested,' Arum said. 'The biggest fight out there for Mike Tyson is George Foreman. Tyson-Bowe is all right, but it's not momentous. If Tyson figures he can beat George Foreman, his time is now because the other guys are young and will still be around.'
15 Foreman says he intends to fight to the end of the year, then call it quits.
16 'Of course, if Mike Tyson wants to fight, I'll give him a chance to get his act together,' Foreman said.
