1 The Australian Cricket Board has passed all information regarding an alleged attempt to bribe leading players to the International Cricket Council, ACB chief executive Graham Halbish said Wednesday.
2 Halbish said all details available had been sent by courier to the ICC headquarters in London and should soon be in the hands of the game's governing body.
3 The ICC has launched an investigation into allegations that leading Australian players were offered bribes to throw matches during their October-November tour of Pakistan.
4 Media reports named spin bowlers Shane Warne and Tim May as being among those who were offered bribes, but the players -- in New Zealand for a limited-overs tournament -- have been instructed to make no comment.
5 The Melbourne Age, meanwhile, Wednesday named Pakistan captain Salim Malik as the man who made the bribe offers -- a report Malik strenuously denied.
6 The Age, a respected broadsheet, also reported Australian batsman Mark Waugh was allegedly offered U.S. dlrs 100,000 to throw away his wicket during the same tour.
7 'I'm now in a position to advise that the ICC has requested from the ACB all of the information it has in relation to the bribery allegations arising from the 1994 tour of Pakistan,' Halbish said in a statement.
8 'In response to that request, the ACB yesterday forwarded to the ICC, by courier, copies of statements made by members of the tour party.
9 'Neither the (ACB) chairman Alan Crompton, nor myself, has any further comment. The matter is now in the hands of the ICC.'
10 According to a report in the Sydney Morning Herald, Warne and May were offered U.S. dlrs 50,000 to throw the first Test against Pakistan by bowling badly and allowing the Pakistan batsmen easy runs. Pakistan won the match by one wicket.
11 The approaches to the Australians were said to have been made by a prominent person in Pakistani cricket, who was not identified in the report.
12 The Melbourne Age reported that Malik would be named by Warne and May as the man who made the offer to them.
13 Malik told Australian Associated Press from Harare, Zimbabwe, that he had never offered anyone money to throw a cricket match.
14 'I think it's shameful. I don't believe it,' he said of the newspaper report.
15 'This is stupid -- I wish I could have that sort of money, you know,' he told the news agency.
16 'I never spoke to anybody like this. I will speak to my lawyer and will take legal action.'
17 Former Australian captain Allan Border has refused to comment further on his claim that he was offered, and angrily rejected, a U.S. dlrs 750,000 offer from a former Pakistan Test cricketer for Australian to lose the fifth Test of the 1993 Ashes series in England.
18 Former Pakistan batsman Mushtaq Mohammad later said he'd mentioned 500,000 pounds during a brief conversation with Border at that Test but said it was a 'joking' conversation and not an attempt at bribery.
19 Dean Jones, who has said he was offered money by an Indian bookmaker for inside information about the Australians during their 1992 tour of Sri Lanka, also has refused to comment further.
